[1] Diffusion-LM Improves Controllable Text Generation (2022). Xiang Lisa Li, John Thickstun, Ishaan Gulrajani et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 238. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: Controlling the behavior of language models (LMs) without re-training is a major open problem in natural language generation. While recent works have demonstrated successes on controlling simple sentence attributes (e.g., sentiment), there has been little progress on complex, fine-grained controls (e.g., syntactic structure). To address this challenge, we develop a new non-autoregressive language model based on continuous diffusions that we call Diffusion-LM. Building upon the recent successes o

[2] POS-Constrained Parallel Decoding for Non-autoregressive Generation (2021). Kexin Yang, Wenqiang Lei, Dayiheng Liu et al.. Venue: arXiv. Citations: 8. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: Kexin Yang, Wenqiang Lei, Dayiheng Liu, Weizhen Qi, Jiancheng Lv. Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers). 2021.

[3] Diffusion-State Policy Optimization for Masked Diffusion Language Models (2026). Daisuke Oba, Hiroki Furuta, Naoaki Okazaki. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 0. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Masked diffusion language models generate text through iterative masked-token filling, but terminal-only rewards on final completions provide coarse credit assignment for the intermediate filling decisions that shape the generation process. We propose Diffusion-State Policy Optimization (DiSPO), a plug-in credit-assignment layer that directly optimizes intermediate filling decisions. At selected intermediate masked states, DiSPO branches by resampling the currently masked positions from rollout-

[4] On the Reasoning Abilities of Masked Diffusion Language Models (2025). Anej Svete, Ashish Sabharwal. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 0. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Masked diffusion models (MDMs) for text offer a compelling alternative to traditional autoregressive language models. Parallel generation makes them efficient, but their computational capabilities and the limitations inherent in their parallelism remain largely unexplored. To this end, we characterize what types of reasoning problems MDMs can provably solve and how efficiently. We do this by connecting MDMs to the well-understood reasoning frameworks of chain of thought (CoT) and padded looped t

[5] Self-Augmenting Retrieval for Diffusion Language Models (2026). Paul Jünger, Justin Lovelace, Linxi Zhao et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 0. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Discrete diffusion language models generate text by iteratively denoising an entire response in parallel. At each step, they predict tentative tokens for every masked position, committing the confident predictions to the output and discarding the unconfident ones. We show that the discarded tokens are in fact a useful lookahead signal for retrieval-augmented generation: even low-confidence tokens often surface salient entities early in the denoising trajectory, enabling retrieval of stronger evi

[6] T$^\star$: Progressive Block Scaling for Masked Diffusion Language Models Through Trajectory Aware Reinforcement Learning (2026). Hanchen Xia, Baoyou Chen, Yutang Ge et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 0. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: We present T$^\star$, a simple TraceRL-based training curriculum for progressive block-size scaling in masked diffusion language models (MDMs). Starting from an AR-initialized small-block MDM, T$^\star$ transitions smoothly to larger blocks, enabling higher-parallelism decoding with minimal performance degradation on math reasoning benchmarks. Moreover, further analysis suggests that T$^\star$ may actually converge to an alternative decoding schedule that achieves comparable performance.

[7] Non-autoregressive Conditional Diffusion Models for Time Series Prediction (2023). Lifeng Shen, James Kwok. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 14. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Recently, denoising diffusion models have led to significant breakthroughs in the generation of images, audio and text. However, it is still an open question on how to adapt their strong modeling ability to model time series. In this paper, we propose TimeDiff, a non-autoregressive diffusion model that achieves high-quality time series prediction with the introduction of two novel conditioning mechanisms: future mixup and autoregressive initialization. Similar to teacher forcing, future mixup al

[8] A Generalized Framework of Sequence Generation with Application to Undirected Sequence Models (2019). Elman Mansimov, Alex Wang, Sean Welleck et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 45. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Undirected neural sequence models such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) have received renewed interest due to their success on discriminative natural language understanding tasks such as question-answering and natural language inference. The problem of generating sequences directly from these models has received relatively little attention, in part because generating from undirected models departs significantly from conventional monotonic generation in directed sequence models. We investigate this 

[9] Dream-Coder 7B: An Open Diffusion Language Model for Code (2025). Zhihui Xie, Jiacheng Ye, Lin Zheng et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 0. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: We present Dream-Coder 7B, an open-source discrete diffusion language model for code generation that exhibits emergent any-order generation capabilities. Unlike traditional autoregressive (AR) models that decode strictly left-to-right, Dream-Coder 7B adaptively determines its decoding strategy based on the coding task: sketch-first generation for complex algorithms, left-to-right generation for straightforward completions, and interleaved reasoning generation for code understanding tasks. We ada

[10] Masked Diffusion Language Models with Frequency-Informed Training (2025). Despoina Kosmopoulou, Efthymios Georgiou, Vaggelis Dorovatas et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 0. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: We present a masked diffusion language modeling framework for data-efficient training for the BabyLM 2025 Challenge. Our approach applies diffusion training objectives to language modeling under strict data constraints, incorporating frequency-informed masking that prioritizes learning from rare tokens while maintaining theoretical validity. We explore multiple noise scheduling strategies, including two-mode approaches, and investigate different noise weighting schemes within the NELBO objective

[11] PartDiffuser: Part-wise 3D Mesh Generation via Discrete Diffusion (2025). Yichen Yang, Hong Li, Haodong Zhu et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 0. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Existing autoregressive (AR) methods for generating artist-designed meshes struggle to balance global structural consistency with high-fidelity local details, and are susceptible to error accumulation. To address this, we propose PartDiffuser, a novel semi-autoregressive diffusion framework for point-cloud-to-mesh generation. The method first performs semantic segmentation on the mesh and then operates in a "part-wise" manner: it employs autoregression between parts to ensure global topology, wh

[12] A Reparameterized Discrete Diffusion Model for Text Generation (2023). Lin Zheng, Jianbo Yuan, Lei Yu et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 9. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: This work studies discrete diffusion probabilistic models with applications to natural language generation. We derive an alternative yet equivalent formulation of the sampling from discrete diffusion processes and leverage this insight to develop a family of reparameterized discrete diffusion models. The derived generic framework is highly flexible, offers a fresh perspective of the generation process in discrete diffusion models, and features more effective training and decoding techniques. We 

[13] Flexible-length Text Infilling for Discrete Diffusion Models (2025). Andrew Zhang, Anushka Sivakumar, Chiawei Tang et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 0. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Discrete diffusion models are a new class of text generators that offer advantages such as bidirectional context use, parallelizable generation, and flexible prompting compared to autoregressive models. However, a critical limitation of discrete diffusion models is their inability to perform flexible-length or flexible-position text infilling without access to ground-truth positional data. We introduce \textbf{DDOT} (\textbf{D}iscrete \textbf{D}iffusion with \textbf{O}ptimal \textbf{T}ransport P

[14] TESS 2: A Large-Scale Generalist Diffusion Language Model (2025). Jaesung Tae, Hamish Ivison, Sachin Kumar et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 0. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: We introduce TESS 2, a general instruction-following diffusion language model that outperforms contemporary instruction-tuned diffusion models, as well as matches and sometimes exceeds strong autoregressive (AR) models. We train TESS 2 by first adapting a strong AR model via continued pretraining with the usual cross-entropy as diffusion loss, and then performing further instruction tuning. We find that adaptation training as well as the choice of the base model is crucial for training good inst

[15] Cascaded Text Generation with Markov Transformers (2020). Yuntian Deng, Alexander M. Rush. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 11. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: The two dominant approaches to neural text generation are fully autoregressive models, using serial beam search decoding, and non-autoregressive models, using parallel decoding with no output dependencies. This work proposes an autoregressive model with sub-linear parallel time generation. Noting that conditional random fields with bounded context can be decoded in parallel, we propose an efficient cascaded decoding approach for generating high-quality output. To parameterize this cascade, we in

[16] Dependency-Guided Parallel Decoding in Discrete Diffusion Language Models (2026). Liran Ringel, Ameen Ali, Yaniv Romano. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 0. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Discrete diffusion language models (dLLMs) accelerate text generation by unmasking multiple tokens in parallel. However, parallel decoding introduces a distributional mismatch: it approximates the joint conditional using a fully factorized product of per-token marginals, which degrades output quality when selected tokens are strongly dependent.   We propose DEMASK (DEpendency-guided unMASKing), a lightweight dependency predictor that attaches to the final hidden states of a dLLM. In a single for

[17] Text-Guided Molecule Generation with Diffusion Language Model (2024). Haisong Gong, Qiang Liu, Shu Wu et al.. Venue: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Citations: 17. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: Text-guided molecule generation is a task where molecules are generated to match specific textual descriptions. Recently, most existing SMILES-based molecule generation methods rely on an autoregressive architecture. In this work, we propose the Text-Guided Molecule Generation with Diffusion Language Model (TGM-DLM), a novel approach that leverages diffusion models to address the limitations of autoregressive methods. TGM-DLM updates token embeddings within the SMILES string collectively and ite

[18] Muse: Text-To-Image Generation via Masked Generative Transformers (2023). Hui‐Wen Chang, Han Zhang, Jarred Barber et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 119. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: We present Muse, a text-to-image Transformer model that achieves state-of-the-art image generation performance while being significantly more efficient than diffusion or autoregressive models. Muse is trained on a masked modeling task in discrete token space: given the text embedding extracted from a pre-trained large language model (LLM), Muse is trained to predict randomly masked image tokens. Compared to pixel-space diffusion models, such as Imagen and DALL-E 2, Muse is significantly more eff

[19] TAG-DLM: Diffusion Language Models for Text-Attributed Graph Learning (2026). Lingjie Chen, Yuanchen Bei, Haobo Xu et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 0. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Text-attributed graphs (TAGs), where each node carries a natural language description, require models to jointly reason over text and graph topology. Existing approaches often handle the two modalities separately: graph neural networks operate on shallow text features, while hybrids of LLMs and graphs use the language model mainly as a text encoder and delegate structure learning to a separate graph module. We propose method that unifies textual reasoning and graph message passing within a maske

[20] Continual Pre-Training for Cross-Lingual LLM Adaptation: Enhancing Japanese Language Capabilities (2024). Kazuki Fujii, Taishi Nakamura, Mengsay Loem et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 6. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Cross-lingual continual pre-training of large language models (LLMs) initially trained on English corpus allows us to leverage the vast amount of English language resources and reduce the pre-training cost. In this study, we constructed Swallow, an LLM with enhanced Japanese capability, by extending the vocabulary of Llama 2 to include Japanese characters and conducting continual pre-training on a large Japanese web corpus. Experimental results confirmed that the performance on Japanese tasks dr

[21] Planner and Executor: Collaboration between Discrete Diffusion And Autoregressive Models in Reasoning (2025). Lina Berrayana, Ahmed Heakl, Muhammad Abdullah Sohail et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 0. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Current autoregressive language models (ARMs) achieve high accuracy but require long token sequences, making them costly. Discrete diffusion language models (DDLMs) enable parallel and flexible generation within a fixed number of steps and have recently emerged for their strong performance in complex reasoning and long-term planning tasks. We present a study exploring hybrid architectures that couple DDLMs with ARMs to assess whether their collaboration can yield complementary benefits. We first

[22] Diffusion-NAT: Self-Prompting Discrete Diffusion for Non-Autoregressive Text Generation (2023). Kun Zhou, Yifan Li, Wayne Xin Zhao et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 7. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Recently, continuous diffusion models (CDM) have been introduced into non-autoregressive (NAR) text-to-text generation. However, the discrete nature of text increases the difficulty of CDM to generate coherent and fluent texts, and also causes the incompatibility problem between CDM and advanced NLP techniques, especially the popular pre-trained language models~(PLMs). To solve it, we propose Diffusion-NAT, which introduces discrete diffusion models~(DDM) into NAR text-to-text generation and int

[23] Glancing Transformer for Non-Autoregressive Neural Machine Translation (2021). Lihua Qian, Hao Zhou, Yu Bao et al.. Venue: arXiv. Citations: 105. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: Lihua Qian, Hao Zhou, Yu Bao, Mingxuan Wang, Lin Qiu, Weinan Zhang, Yong Yu, Lei Li. Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers). 2021.

[24] Semi-Autoregressive Neural Machine Translation (2018). Chunqi Wang, Ji Zhang, Haiqing Chen. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 12. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Existing approaches to neural machine translation are typically autoregressive models. While these models attain state-of-the-art translation quality, they are suffering from low parallelizability and thus slow at decoding long sequences. In this paper, we propose a novel model for fast sequence generation --- the semi-autoregressive Transformer (SAT). The SAT keeps the autoregressive property in global but relieves in local and thus is able to produce multiple successive words in parallel at ea

[25] SmBoP: Semi-autoregressive Bottom-up Semantic Parsing (2021). Ohad Rubin, Jonathan Berant. Venue: arXiv. Citations: 86. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: The de-facto standard decoding method for semantic parsing in recent years has been to autoregressively decode the abstract syntax tree of the target program using a top-down depthfirst traversal. In this work, we propose an alternative approach: a Semi-autoregressive Bottom-up Parser (SMBOP) that constructs at decoding step t the top-K sub-trees of height t. Our parser enjoys several benefits compared to top-down autoregressive parsing. From an efficiency perspective, bottom-up parsing allows t

[26] AutoTemplate: A Simple Recipe for Lexically Constrained Text Generation (2022). Hayate Iso. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 5. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Lexically constrained text generation is one of the constrained text generation tasks, which aims to generate text that covers all the given constraint lexicons. While the existing approaches tackle this problem using a lexically constrained beam search algorithm or dedicated model using non-autoregressive decoding, there is a trade-off between the generated text quality and the hard constraint satisfaction. We introduce AutoTemplate, a simple yet effective lexically constrained text generation 

[27] Efficient Continual Pre-training for Building Domain Specific Large Language Models (2023). Yong Xie, Karan Aggarwal, Aitzaz Ahmad. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 5. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable open-domain capabilities. LLMs tailored for a domain are typically trained entirely on domain corpus to excel at handling domain-specific tasks. In this work, we explore an alternative strategy of continual pre-training as a means to develop domain-specific LLMs over an existing open-domain LLM. We introduce FinPythia-6.9B, developed through domain-adaptive continual pre-training on the financial domain. Continual pre-trained FinPythia sh

[28] Mamba: Linear-Time Sequence Modeling with Selective State Spaces (2023). Albert Gu, Tri Dao. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 1046. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: Foundation models, now powering most of the exciting applications in deep learning, are almost universally based on the Transformer architecture and its core attention module. Many subquadratic-time architectures such as linear attention, gated convolution and recurrent models, and structured state space models (SSMs) have been developed to address Transformers' computational inefficiency on long sequences, but they have not performed as well as attention on important modalities such as language

[29] Text Generation with Diffusion Language Models: A Pre-training Approach with Continuous Paragraph Denoise (2022). Zhenghao Lin, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 16. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: In this paper, we introduce a novel dIffusion language modEl pre-training framework for text generation, which we call GENIE. GENIE is a large-scale pretrained diffusion language model that consists of an encoder and a diffusion-based decoder, which can generate text by gradually transforming a random noise sequence into a coherent text sequence. To pre-train GENIE on a large-scale language corpus, we design a new continuous paragraph denoise objective, which encourages the diffusion-decoder to 

[30] Simple and Effective Masked Diffusion Language Models (2024). Subham Sekhar Sahoo, Marianne Arriola, Yair Schiff et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 13. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: While diffusion models excel at generating high-quality images, prior work reports a significant performance gap between diffusion and autoregressive (AR) methods in language modeling. In this work, we show that simple masked discrete diffusion is more performant than previously thought. We apply an effective training recipe that improves the performance of masked diffusion models and derive a simplified, Rao-Blackwellized objective that results in additional improvements. Our objective has a si

[31] SSD-LM: Semi-autoregressive Simplex-based Diffusion Language Model for Text Generation and Modular Control (2023). Xiaochuang Han, Sachin Kumar, Yulia Tsvetkov. Venue: arXiv. Citations: 25. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: Despite the growing success of diffusion models in continuous-valued domains (e.g., images), similar efforts for discrete domains such as text have yet to match the performance of autoregressive language models. In this work, we present SSD-LM-a diffusion-based language model with two key design choices. First, SSD-LM is semi-autoregressive, iteratively generating blocks of text, allowing for flexible output length at decoding time while enabling local bidirectional context updates. Second, it i

[32] Continual Pre-training of Language Models (2023). Zixuan Ke, Yijia Shao, Haowei Lin et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 16. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Language models (LMs) have been instrumental for the rapid advance of natural language processing. This paper studies continual pre-training of LMs, in particular, continual domain-adaptive pre-training (or continual DAP-training). Existing research has shown that further pre-training an LM using a domain corpus to adapt the LM to the domain can improve the end-task performance in the domain. This paper proposes a novel method to continually DAP-train an LM with a sequence of unlabeled domain co

[33] Non-autoregressive Transformer by Position Learning (2019). Yu Bao, Hao Zhou, Jiangtao Feng et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 30. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Non-autoregressive models are promising on various text generation tasks. Previous work hardly considers to explicitly model the positions of generated words. However, position modeling is an essential problem in non-autoregressive text generation. In this study, we propose PNAT, which incorporates positions as a latent variable into the text generative process. Experimental results show that PNAT achieves top results on machine translation and paraphrase generation tasks, outperforming several 

[34] Learning Non-Autoregressive Models from Search for Unsupervised Sentence Summarization (2022). Puyuan Liu, Chenyang Huang, Lili Mou. Venue: Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Citations: 14. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: Text summarization aims to generate a short summary for an input text. In this work, we propose a Non-Autoregressive Unsupervised Summarization (NAUS) approach, which does not require parallel data for training. Our NAUS first performs edit-based search towards a heuristically defined score, and generates a summary as pseudo-groundtruth. Then, we train an encoder-only non-autoregressive Transformer based on the search result. We also propose a dynamic programming approach for length-control deco

[35] On the Learning of Non-Autoregressive Transformers (2022). Fei Huang, Tianhua Tao, Hao Zhou et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 5. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Non-autoregressive Transformer (NAT) is a family of text generation models, which aims to reduce the decoding latency by predicting the whole sentences in parallel. However, such latency reduction sacrifices the ability to capture left-to-right dependencies, thereby making NAT learning very challenging. In this paper, we present theoretical and empirical analyses to reveal the challenges of NAT learning and propose a unified perspective to understand existing successes. First, we show that simpl

[36] Continual Pre-Training of Large Language Models: How to (re)warm your model? (2023). Kshitij Gupta, Benjamin Thérien, Adam Ibrahim et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 12. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Large language models (LLMs) are routinely pre-trained on billions of tokens, only to restart the process over again once new data becomes available. A much cheaper and more efficient solution would be to enable the continual pre-training of these models, i.e. updating pre-trained models with new data instead of re-training them from scratch. However, the distribution shift induced by novel data typically results in degraded performance on past data. Taking a step towards efficient continual pre

[37] Non-Autoregressive Coarse-to-Fine Video Captioning (2021). Bang Yang, Yuexian Zou, Fenglin Liu et al.. Venue: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Citations: 77. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: It is encouraged to see that progress has been made to bridge videos and natural language. However, mainstream video captioning methods suffer from slow inference speed due to the sequential manner of autoregressive decoding, and prefer generating generic descriptions due to the insufficient training of visual words (e.g., nouns and verbs) and inadequate decoding paradigm. In this paper, we propose a non-autoregressive decoding based model with a coarse-to-fine captioning procedure to alleviate 

[38] POINTER: Constrained Progressive Text Generation via Insertion-based Generative Pre-training (2020). Yizhe Zhang, Guoyin Wang, Chunyuan Li et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 10. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Large-scale pre-trained language models, such as BERT and GPT-2, have achieved excellent performance in language representation learning and free-form text generation. However, these models cannot be directly employed to generate text under specified lexical constraints. To address this challenge, we present POINTER (PrOgressive INsertion-based TransformER), a simple yet novel insertion-based approach for hard-constrained text generation. The proposed method operates by progressively inserting n

[39] Non-Autoregressive Neural Machine Translation (2017). Jiatao Gu, James Bradbury, Caiming Xiong et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 450. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: Existing approaches to neural machine translation condition each output word on previously generated outputs. We introduce a model that avoids this autoregressive property and produces its outputs in parallel, allowing an order of magnitude lower latency during inference. Through knowledge distillation, the use of input token fertilities as a latent variable, and policy gradient fine-tuning, we achieve this at a cost of as little as 2.0 BLEU points relative to the autoregressive Transformer netw

[40] DiffusionBERT: Improving Generative Masked Language Models with Diffusion Models (2023). Zhengfu He, Tianxiang Sun, Qiong Tang et al.. Venue: arXiv. Citations: 67. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: We present DiffusionBERT, a new generative masked language model based on discrete diffusion models. Diffusion models and many pretrained language models have a shared training objective, i.e., denoising, making it possible to combine the two powerful models and enjoy the best of both worlds. On the one hand, diffusion models offer a promising training strategy that helps improve the generation quality. On the other hand, pre-trained denoising language models (e.g., BERT) can be used as a good i

[41] A Comparative Study on Non-Autoregressive Modelings for Speech-to-Text Generation (2021). Yosuke Higuchi, Nanxin Chen, Yuya Fujita et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 7. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Non-autoregressive (NAR) models simultaneously generate multiple outputs in a sequence, which significantly reduces the inference speed at the cost of accuracy drop compared to autoregressive baselines. Showing great potential for real-time applications, an increasing number of NAR models have been explored in different fields to mitigate the performance gap against AR models. In this work, we conduct a comparative study of various NAR modeling methods for end-to-end automatic speech recognition

[42] DiffuSeq: Sequence to Sequence Text Generation with Diffusion Models (2022). Shansan Gong, Mukai Li, Jiangtao Feng et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 94. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: Recently, diffusion models have emerged as a new paradigm for generative models. Despite the success in domains using continuous signals such as vision and audio, adapting diffusion models to natural language is under-explored due to the discrete nature of texts, especially for conditional generation. We tackle this challenge by proposing DiffuSeq: a diffusion model designed for sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) text generation tasks. Upon extensive evaluation over a wide range of Seq2Seq tasks, we

[43] Fully Non-autoregressive Neural Machine Translation: Tricks of the Trade (2021). Jiatao Gu, Xiang Kong. Venue: arXiv. Citations: 78. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: Fully non-autoregressive neural machine translation (NAT) simultaneously predicts tokens with single forward of neural networks, which significantly reduces the inference latency at the expense of quality drop compared to the Transformer baseline. In this work, we target on closing the performance gap while maintaining the latency advantage. We first inspect the fundamental issues of fully NAT models, and adopt dependency reduction in the learning space of output tokens as the primary guidance. 

[44] Non-Autoregressive Text Generation with Pre-trained Language Models (2021). Yixuan Su, Deng Cai, Yan Wang et al.. Venue: arXiv (Cornell University). Citations: 10. Source: arxiv.
    Abstract: Non-autoregressive generation (NAG) has recently attracted great attention due to its fast inference speed. However, the generation quality of existing NAG models still lags behind their autoregressive counterparts. In this work, we show that BERT can be employed as the backbone of a NAG model to greatly improve performance. Additionally, we devise mechanisms to alleviate the two common problems of vanilla NAG models: the inflexibility of prefixed output length and the conditional independence o

[45] Paraformer: Fast and Accurate Parallel Transformer for Non-autoregressive End-to-End Speech Recognition (2022). Zhifu Gao, Shiliang Zhang, Ian McLoughlin et al.. Venue: Interspeech 2022. Citations: 109. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: Transformers have recently dominated the ASR field. Although able to yield good performance, they involve an autoregressive (AR) decoder to generate tokens one by one, which is computationally inefficient. To speed up inference, non-autoregressive (NAR) methods, e.g. single-step NAR, were designed, to enable parallel generation. However, due to an independence assumption within the output tokens, performance of single-step NAR is inferior to that of AR models, especially with a large-scale corpu

[46] PIMNet: A Parallel, Iterative and Mimicking Network for Scene Text Recognition (2021). Zhi Qiao, Yu Zhou, Wei Jin et al.. Venue: arXiv. Citations: 80. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: Nowadays, scene text recognition has attracted more and more attention due to its various applications. Most state-of-the-art methods adopt an encoder-decoder framework with attention mechanism, which generates text autoregressively from left to right. Despite the convincing performance, the speed is limited because of the one-by-one decoding strategy. As opposed to autoregressive models, non-autoregressive models predict the results in parallel with a much shorter inference time, but the accura

[47] Guiding Non-Autoregressive Neural Machine Translation Decoding with Reordering Information (2021). Qiu Ran, Yankai Lin, Peng Li et al.. Venue: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Citations: 68. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: Non-autoregressive neural machine translation (NAT) generates each target word in parallel and has achieved promising inference acceleration. However, existing NAT models still have a big gap in translation quality compared to autoregressive neural machine translation models due to the multimodality problem: the target words may come from multiple feasible translations. To address this problem, we propose a novel NAT framework ReorderNAT which explicitly models the reordering information to guid

[48] A Cheaper and Better Diffusion Language Model with Soft-Masked Noise (2023). Jiaao Chen, Aston Zhang, Mu Li et al.. Venue: arXiv. Citations: 17. Source: openalex.
    Abstract: Diffusion models that are based on iterative denoising have been recently proposed and leveraged in various generation tasks like image generation. Whereas, as a way inherently built for continuous data, existing diffusion models still have some limitations in modeling discrete data, e.g., languages. For example, the generally used Gaussian noise can not handle the discrete corruption well, and the objectives in continuous spaces fail to be stable for textual data in the diffusion process especi
